   ﻿

   IFRAME: //www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-KSQKQV

                        A New Logic for Economic Growth

   (BUTTON) Menu

Main menu

     * To www.nhh.no
     * Search the web site ____________________ (BUTTON) Search
     * en

     * PhD Candidates and new researchers
     * PhD Defenses
     * Expert Committees
     * About Bulletin

   Illustative. Innovation and growth.
   NHH

   28 October 2019 13:53
     * Innovation and Entrepreneurship

A New Logic for Economic Growth

   A linear economic growth logic is no longer sustainable. A call for a
   sustainable growth that make people thrive, is required.

   Tor W. Andreassen. Photo: Odd Mehus

Tor W. Andreassen

   Professor, Department of Strategy and Management

   In 2018, Oxford economist Kate Raworth gave an interesting TedX-talk on
   economic growth. A filled to capacity auditorium jumped to their feet
   when she finished. Her point of departure was that contemporary
   thinking on human prosperity is linked to economic growth like an
   airplane that after takeoff, never stops climbing.

   For politicians and economists, a stagnating or retracting economy is
   not a good sign and Gross Domestic Product (GDP) is a strong indicator
   whether the economy is heading in the right direction. Today, the
   sustainability of the growth logic is challenged.

   The growth dominant logic prevailed in the 1930s and is elegantly
   discussed in a book from 1960: “The Stages of Economic Growth: a
   non-communist manifesto” by W.W. Rostoff. In chapter 2, the author
   defines five stages:
    1. The post-Newtonian society untouched by man’s capability of
       regularly manipulating the environment to his advantage
    2. The pre-conditions for take-off
    3. The take-off
    4. The drive to maturity
    5. The age of high mass-consumption

   The Swedish activist, Gretha Thunberg, made us painfully aware during
   her resent UN-speech that we are currently at stage 5 – a stage that is
   not sustainable. Few would challenge that we need a new logic for
   economic growth. Professor Raworth state that: “we need to stay within
   the boundaries of a sweet spot where people thrive”.

For all to thrive, some have to give

   Currently, too many economies in the first world are outside the
   boundaries and over-consume the world’s resources. These countries must
   reduce economic growth. At the same time, millions of people must be
   welcomed into the sweet spot by increasing economic growth. For all to
   thrive, some have to give. In the developed world, there is a movement
   toward 3Rs: Reuse, Recycle, and Reduce.

   In addition, I can see four initiatives that can bring us closer to the
   sweet spot: increased productivity, sharing economy, circular economy,
   and innovations.

Increased productivity

   When more firms and customers can do more with less, we have increased
   the total productivity. But because customers’ input/output ratio is
   not estimated, it is hard to say how productivity in most, if not all
   developed economies, progress. Another issue is that several of the
   leading software products available for consumers are free of charge,
   e.g. Facebook, Google, etc. In an effort to estimate the value of free
   software for consumers, Erik Brynjolfsson and his colleagues at MIT
   developed an alternative measure for economic development: GDP-Benefits
   for consumers. Free software used intensively by consumers whose input
   (e.g. time) or output (e.g. benefits) is not measured, creates a
   productivity measurement challenge. If you cannot measure it, you
   cannot manage it!

Sharing economy

   Sharing economy is carried forward by a wave of platform companies like
   Lyft, Airbnb and TaskRabit who efficiently and effectively connect
   buyers and sellers via a platform. The basic idea behind the sharing
   economy is to better utilize unused resources like time and assets.
   From an economic growth perspective, utilizing free unused assets may
   increase GDP significantly. In an EU28-report they found that GDP could
   theoretically increase by EUR572 billions each year in the region
   simply by utilizing free resources more effectively. Today, we see
   several providers turning their goods products, into a service like
   cars as a service.

Circular economy

   Circular economy is in the vogue as more consumers and leaders realize
   that the old linear value chain
   (production-distribution-consumption-destruction) is creating a lot of
   waste and is no longer sustainable. Circular economy is rethinking the
   entire process and every component of any good or service with a view
   to bring it back into productive usage later. The end-result is reduced
   waste. A Norwegian provider of asphalt changed his b-model from linear
   to circular by leasing the asphalt to local authorities, collecting it
   after two to three years, refurbishing the asphalt before putting it
   back. The new mantra is: One party’s waste is another party’s raw
   material!

Innovations

   Innovations are the mother of all progress – more often than not driven
   by technology. For service-oriented firms technology has given us
   self-service technology enabling customers to serve them self without
   interacting with frontline employees. Technology has put smartphones in
   the hands of consumers and given them tremendous benefits. Technology
   has given us new platform-based business models and services that have
   challenged the incumbents in numerous industries. 5G with its speed and
   volume of data will revolutionize services yet again. Internet of
   Things (IoT) will enable firms to collect vast amounts of data to be
   used for predictions, decisions making, and innovations. The challenge
   is to better commercialize inventions and scale firms.

Toward the economic sweet spot

   In Norway, Sweden, and in the USA, we measure customers’ perception of
   numerous’ commercial and social innovations based on the same
   methodology developed at NHH Norwegian school of Economics and marketed
   as the Norwegian Innovation Index (NII), The Swedish Innovation Index
   (SII), and The American Innovation Index (AII). In Sweden, Center for
   Service Research (CTF) at Karlstad Business School is operating the
   SII. In the US, Rockbridge Associates and Fordham University, Gabelli
   School of Business, operate AII. Firms that are perceived as high on
   commercial and social innovations are considered to be in the sweet
   spot by contributing to a new sustainable business logic. First, they
   provide customers with innovations that they perceive as valuable.
   Second, they contribute to society through their “green” innovations
   making them good neighbors. In sum, commercial and social innovations
   create a strong and emotionally base loyalty – which is good for future
   cash flow and firm value.
   Venn diagram illustrating the top ten companies on commercial and
   social innovation. The diagram shows that six of the companies are both
   in the top ten on commercial and social innovation. Top ten companies
   on commercial innovation are: IKEA, Telenor, Sbanken, Nordic Choice
   Hotels, Toyota, Stormberg, Norwegian, Komplett, OneCall and
   Zalando.Where IKEA, Telenor, Sbanken, Nordic Choice Hotels, Toyota and
   Stormberg are in the top ten on both social and commercial innovation.
   In the Figure, I have illustrated the Norwegian firms that in 2018 were
   in the sweet spot, i.e. high on commercial and social innovations.

   The guest article was published on servsig.no last week.
   ﻿
     * Share on Facebook
     * Share on Twitter
     * Share on LinkedIn
     * Share by e-mail

   ____________________ (BUTTON) Search

NHH Norwegian School of Economics

   Phone
          (+47) 55 95 90 00

   Address
          NHH, Helleveien 30, 5045 Bergen, Norway

   Privacy policy and cookies
     * cems.org
     * www.efmd.org
     * associationofmbas.com
     * aacsb.edu

About NHH

     * Contact
     * Vacant positions
     * For the media
     * News from NHH Bulletin

More

     * For students
     * For employees
     * For alumni

     * NHH Mission Statement
     * facebook logo
     * twitter
     * instagram logo
     * youtube logo
     * Snapchat
     * Linkedin
     * NHH Research Gate
